Design doc for full cluster lifecycle API (#739)
aws/eks-anywhere: designs/full-cluster-lifecycle-api.md

# Full Cluster Lifecycle API

## Introduction

**Problem:** currently, the only way to manage EKS Anywhere clusters is by using the CLI. We lack an API to facilitate automation.

This takes away from the native Kubernetes experience we want users to have, even when managing the cluster lifecycle (for example, being able to use `kubectl`).

Moreover, it stops users from being able to rely on GitOps (one of our core recommendations to manage EKS Anywhere) for full cluster lifecycle.

### Tenets

* ****Simple:**** simple to use, simple to understand, simple to maintain
* ****Declarative:**** intent based system, as close to a Kubernetes native experience as possible

### Goals and Objectives

As a Kubernetes administrator I want to:

* Create EKS Anywhere workload clusters using: kubectl apply -f cluster.spec
* Upgrade EKS Anywhere workload clusters using: kubectl apply -f cluster.spec
* Delete EKS Anywhere workload clusters using: kubectl delete -f cluster.spec
* Create EKS Anywhere workload clusters using GitOps
* Update/Upgrade EKS Anywhere workload clusters using GitOps
* Delete EKS Anywhere workload clusters using GitOps

### Statement of Scope

**In scope**

> * Cluster full lifecycle with `kubectl`

Author: Correct, I'll add that

* Cluster full lifecycle with GitOps

**Not in scope**

* Create/upgrade/delete self-managed clusters through the API

**Future scope**

* Reconcile (updates) GitOps configuration

> * Reconcile (updates) IDPs configuration

Author: Identity providers
I'll change it :)

![Cluster reconcile](images/cluster_reconcile.png)

Note: this diagram is missing things like applying tolerations to a vSphere controller, taints for worker nodes, force updating the `ClusterResourceSet` resources, IAM auth, etc. Those will be added as we start the implementation, when we decide where they should go in the flow. 

In order to check if something needs to change, reconcilers are supposed to compare the desired state (in our case, a combination of multiple EKSA objects, like `Cluster`, `<Provider>MachineConfig`, etc.) with the current state (in our case a combination of CAPI objects, CNI and some extra Kubernetes objects, depending on the provider).

Following that, on every reconcile loop we would compare (object by object) if the objects coming from our CAPI "template" are different than the ones already present in the clusters (some of them will be in the management cluster and others in the workload cluster).

> This could be an expensive operation, so we could potentially cache it in the status of our cluster object. We would need a combination of all the observed generation's for all the resources that represent our desired state (cluster itself, provider datacenter, machineconfigs...) and the "phase" (for example, "CP reconciled"). A drawback of this approach is that, once the cluster had passed a certain phase, if any of the "result" objects changes (for example by manual user interaction), we would no "reconcile them back" to the desired state. Such reconciliation would only happen upon change in our EKSA objects. We won't implement this right away and will only reconsider if we find performance issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This could be an expensive operation, so we could potentially cache it in the status of our cluster object. We would need a combination of all the observed generation's for all the resources that represent our desired state (cluster itself, provider datacenter, machineconfigs...) and the "phase" (for example, "CP reconciled"). A drawback of this approach is that, once the cluster had passed a certain phase, if any of the "result" objects changes (for example by manual user interaction), we would not be able to "reconcile them back" to the desired state. Such reconciliation would only happen upon change in our EKSA objects. We won't implement this right away and will only reconsider if we find performance issues.
```

Reviewer: When we implement this we can figure out how much performance we lose. Otherwise the other option would be is to write all the hooks for reconciling with the capi objects, which would be so hard to maintain but avoids just looking at the entire template. I still support using the template to compare the objects and let capi reconcile, but we can think about breaking the template further in smaller pieces to be able to not have to reconcile all the objects at the same time. I think you touch on this on the below paragraph too.

Author: Yeah, I was thinking we can probably add some logging with the time it takes to run each reconcile" step.

To be honest, we don't think we'll need to do anything about performance, at least during these first iterations. From a user's expectations point of view, cluster reconciliation is no something that needs to happen immediately. Obviously, the faster the better, but taking a few tens of seconds extra is not a big deal.

Right now object comparison requires a bit of transforming and parsing because our providers' code generates multiobject yaml files. In order to improve this process, we should refactor such code and start using API structs. However, this might or might not be part of the first implementation, depending on the agreed scope.

### `VSphereDatacenterConfig` Validation

In order to maintain some of the validations we run today in the CLI, we will need to port them to the controller. 

Kubernetes offers the validation webhook for CRDs: custom code to validate objects before been accepted by the kube-api server. However, these validation are supposed to be light and fast. Most our validations require calling the vSphere API, which makes them too heavy for the validation webhook.

> We will implement those validations in a separate reconciler. This means that they will run after the object has already been accepted by the api server. We will store if the object has been validated or not as well as the validation error (if any) in the V`SphereDatacenterConfig` status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will implement those validations in a separate reconciler. This means that they will run after the object has already been accepted by the api server. We will store if the object has been validated or not as well as the validation error (if any) in the `VSphereDatacenterConfig` status.
```

Reviewer: So the status will have a "Validated" state?

Author: @vivek-koppuru yeah!

`VSphereMachineConfig` requires similar validations to the datacenter config object. We will apply the same pattern, having a separate reconciler for `VSphereMachineConfig` , the status and only reconciling the cluster once they have been validated.

### New ClusterStatus 

The [current Cluster Status](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/blob/v0.6.0/pkg/api/v1alpha1/cluster_types.go#L287)will be modified to include extra fields and conditions. These will be used by the reconciler methods to trigger the appropriate actions and to allow users to check progress of operations.

If an error occurs controllers will set `spec.ClusterStatus.FailureReason` and `spec.ClusterStatus.FailureMessage`.

```
type ClusterStatus struct {
    
    // +optional
    FailureReason *v1alpha.ClusterStatusError `json:"failureReason,omitempty"`

    // Message to help administrators understand why an operation failed 
    // +optional
    FailureMessage *string `json:"failureMessage,omitempty"`

    // Spec has been validated
    // +optional
    SpecValid bool `json:"specValid,omitempty"`

    // E.g. Pending, Creating, Upgrading, Deleting, Failed etc.
    // +optional

>     Phase string `json:"phase,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: ```
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Pending;Updating;...
type PhaseEnum string
const (
  PhasePending PhaseEnum = "Pending'
  PhaseUpdating PhaseEnum = "Updating'
...
```

Reviewer: Is this going to have a `Running` phase too?

Author: @TerryHowe I like the idea of the enum
However, since we still don't know which phases we will have (one of the reasons why this status is still marked as "might change"), are you ok if I add a comment saying this should be an enum and we come back and update the doc once we have the phases finalized?

Author: @vivek-koppuru Yeah, I think so (or `Reconciled` or whatever makes sense). But @mdsgabriel is the status's expert, so he might disagree.

### CRD Defaults

Currently, as part of the CLI logic we modify the cluster spec objects provided by the user, adding defaults (eg. vSphere templates) and modifying some fields to have valid values (eg. vSphere paths with wildcards).

Defaults can be added both from the types mutation webhooks or from the reconcilers themselves (depending on the logic needed to come up with those values).

However, we should stop modifying the fields that the user has already specified. When those values need to be transformed (in order to be validated or used), we will run the same logic the CLI currently uses and store the final values in the status object.

### Controller and Self-managed Clusters

Currently, it is only possible to update a few fields through the EKSA controller (like worker node replicas). This includes self-managed clusters.

> As part of this design, that support for self-managed clusters will be removed. This simplifies the controller and avoids confusion about the difference in upgrade capabilities between self-managed clusters and managed clusters. The upgrade capabilities through the CLI will remain intact.

Reviewer: Removing it would be a breaking change. If we want to revisit after anyways, can we try to find a way to not have it confusing and still have support the same changes we do today?

Author: I understand your concern and you are totally right, it's definitely a breaking change.
However, I fear that looking for that "not confusing yet not breaking" solution might blow up the scope and complexity of this project (complexity is the one that worries me the most).

I agree making breaking changes is not good. But I think this is the phase of the project where we can still do it, we are in alpha. And it's not really something that will break existing clusters in any way, it just removes part of the functionality. Moreover, it's just a transitional state until we have a real solution for management cluster.

This is obviously just a proposal, so suggestions/idea are more than welcomed.

Reviewer: My understanding is that modifying the worker node configuration is a subset of what we want to allow, so if we have a way to know whether the cluster is a management or not, then it should be fairly easy to have a conditional based on that in our webhooks. I don't really see how it makes it more confusing if our messaging is clear about management clusters or more complex if we just need to add a check on that field to keep the current functionality, but I won't oppose it if we decide that is not the way to go. I just put it as a comment as I feel we may not need to do that.

Author: @vivek-koppuru added comment saying we will revisit this once we implement validation and might still support it

We will revisit this once we decide to offer full cluster lifecycle support for self-managed clusters.

## User Experience

> For now, the only way to create and upgrade a management cluster is through the CLI. Unlike the previous versions, upgrading a management cluster through GitOps is no longer supported.

Reviewer 2: Might be nice to have a sentence about why you cannot upgrade a management cluster through GitOps.

Author: Done!

The second one could palliated by using a different user than only has the permissions that the controller needs (to mention some: install the CNI, update vSphere controllers and DS, update CoreDNS permissions...). However, this user will need be created at some point using the admin credentials, since those are the only ones provided by CAPI. So in fact, this will just pushing the risk somewhere else.  An alternative could be to add a new feature to CAPI that allows us to specify optional users/roles to be created automatically.

Both the controller and the vSphere credentials live in the `eksa-system` namespace. RBAC can be used to secure it. We will document that this namespace should only be accessible by `ClusterAdmin` (or some other high level access role).

In order to mitigate the third one we will add the ability to specify one (or a group) of namespaces that the controller will watch. This will reduce the attack vector, allowing cluster administrators to secure those namespaces accordingly. However this feature is not in this design’s scope and will be designed and delivered separately.

> It’s worth noting that, one added benefit of this design is that, workload clusters have very little vSphere access. So Ops teams can give `ClusterAdmin` access to the workload clusters to developers without risking exposing vSphere admin credentials.

Reviewer 2: 👍  but isn't this the case for clusters that are not self managed anyway?

Author: You are right. I'll rephrase this.
I think what I missed here (and it's probably the most important thing) is that with the current implementation to create workload clusters (through the CLI) you still need "admin" access to the management cluster (not really admin but basically total access to the `eksa-system` namespace and CAPI resources). And that gives you access to the vsphere credentials and to any other cluster for that matter, including the management cluster.

Author: Done

The rest of this document is a high level specification about changes to the EKSA controller and CLI necessary to allow users to create/upgrade/delete EKS Anywhere clusters using Kubectl or GitOps.

## Solution Details

### Architectural Diagram

![Cluster lifecycle](images/cluster-lifecycle.png)
### Cluster Reconciler

The main logic for this feature will be implemented in the cluster reconciler. This will take care of creating/patching and deleting all resources needed for a cluster to be fully operational, from CAPI resources in the management cluster to installing the CNI in the workload cluster.

This flow will be very similar to what we do today in the CLI: a mix between the create and upgrade flows. However, the "wait for condition" pattern that we extensively use in the CLI is not suitable for an event based system like a Kubernetes controller. We shouldn't block the execution of the control loop. This could be done instead, by watching resources from the reconciler (eg. CAPI `Cluster` and `KubeadmControlPlane`) and use an event handler to enqueue cluster reconcile requests in response to those events.

> ![Cluster reconcile](images/cluster_reconcile.png)

Author: The latter: the controller will return an empty `ctrl.Result` (and nil error) and when `KCP/Cluster` objects change, that will enqueue a eks-a `Cluster` reconcile request.

Following that, on every reconcile loop we would compare (object by object) if the objects coming from our CAPI "template" are different than the ones already present in the clusters (some of them will be in the management cluster and others in the workload cluster).

This could be an expensive operation, so we could potentially cache it in the status of our cluster object. We would need a combination of all the observed generation's for all the resources that represent our desired state (cluster itself, provider datacenter, machineconfigs...) and the "phase" (for example, "CP reconciled"). A drawback of this approach is that, once the cluster had passed a certain phase, if any of the "result" objects changes (for example by manual user interaction), we would not be able to "reconcile them back" to the desired state. Such reconciliation would only happen upon change in our EKSA objects. We won't implement this right away and will only reconsider if we find performance issues.

> Right now object comparison requires a bit of transforming and parsing because our providers' code generates multiobject yaml files. In order to improve this process, we should refactor such code and start using API structs. However, this might or might not be part of the first implementation, depending on the agreed scope.

Reviewer 3: 👍 for using API structs eventually

### `VSphereDatacenterConfig` Validation

In order to maintain some of the validations we run today in the CLI, we will need to port them to the controller. 

Kubernetes offers the validation webhook for CRDs: custom code to validate objects before been accepted by the kube-api server. However, these validation are supposed to be light and fast. Most our validations require calling the vSphere API, which makes them too heavy for the validation webhook.

We will implement those validations in a separate reconciler. This means that they will run after the object has already been accepted by the api server. We will store if the object has been validated or not as well as the validation error (if any) in the `VSphereDatacenterConfig` status.

> The cluster reconciler won’t continue with the reconciliation process until `VSphereDatacenterConfig` has been marked as validated. If not valid, it will surface the error on its own status.

Author: I like it
I won't add it in the doc since it's not really needed for this design to work but we'll definitely create a task for it
